# Background

Planned preventative maintenance \(PPM\) is the term used to cover any maintenance of equipment that is scheduled in advance with the intention of ensuring the equipment is safe, in good working order and effective. Provision of equipment with a PPM schedule decreases the risks of device failure and thus the potential for harm to an end-user from the equipment. Appropriate PPM should also reduce the total cost of ownership of equipment through reducing the costs \(resource, time, equipment, reputation and litigation\) associated with device failures and faults and the consequent reactive servicing required.

PPM may also be known by other terms such as annual service visits, servicing, maintenance, or PAT testing etc. These terms are not necessarily synonymous with PPM however and can be used ambiguously. As examples, a PPM schedule does not have to be annual and also should not only consist of a Portable Appliance Test. Thus the term PPM is used, and defined, within this document.

This guidance has been produced specifically targeted at services providing the NHS England commissioned specialised service – “Complex Disability Equipment– Communication Aids \(Specialised AAC services\)” \(D01/S/b\). The required service delivery and standards is defined by the NHS England service specifications and this includes the provision of ‘complex disability equipment’, specifically specialised communication aids. These devices are provided to clients for use in their own homes and other environments \(i.e. wherever they may go\) for as long as they need it \(which is likely to be a life-long need in most cases\).

The current service specification includes the requirement to: have the ‘ability to issue, monitor, maintain, recall and refurbish equipment’; and that ‘Each user of equipment shall receive on-going support in case of its malfunction, an annual service maintenance visit including statutory testing of equipment and timely review of equipment appropriateness for them’.

The terminology around these devices is vague and deliberately not addressed here, however other terms such as ‘high tech’ communication aid, SGD, VOCA etc. have also been used. For the purposes of this document, which is considering PPM requirements, the communication aids being considered are those that are powered communication aids. Powered communication aids are battery and/or mains powered, will be either microcontroller based or, increasingly, on microprocessor based computers – specifically tablet and smart phone technology. Microprocessor devices are either built from chip reference designs as units specifically made for assistive applications or based on 3rd party provided computers. Both approaches run standard operating systems and either expose this \(to provide potential for other computer applications to run\) or run communication software in console mode \(i.e. restricting the use of other applications\). The terms dedicated and non-dedicated devices have been used but it is suggested they are not helpful in this context as they potentially mix the dedication of the application VS the dedication of the design and also potentially hold certain implication relating to the CE marking and classification of the device.

Document Scope: This document sets out suggested guidance related to PPM. This document does not cover other aspects of a device’s life cycle such as commissioning, decommissioning or reactive servicing. This document is not specific to devices of any CE marking classification – e.g. Medical Device, Low Voltage Directive etc.

This document is intended only as a guide and has no legal standing. For the purposes of clarity, this document does not supplement any other guidance including: manufacturer's instructions and guidance, medical device legislation and guidance; electrical safety legislation; CE marking and classification documentation; local service or host trust/organisation policy and guidance.

